# Chapter 7: Functions and Modules

In our previous chapters, we've briefly mentioned functions and modules. In this chapter, let's look at them in detail. To reiterate, all programming languages come with built-in codes that we can use to make our lives easier as programmers. These codes consist of pre-written classes, variables and functions for performing certain common tasks and are saved in files known as modules. Let's first look at functions.

## 7.1 What are Functions?

Functions are simply pre-written codes that perform a certain task. For an analogy, think of the mathematical functions available in MS Excel. To add numbers, we can use the `sum()` function and type `sum(A1:A5)` instead of typeing `A1+A2+A3+A4+A5`.

Depending on how the function is written, whether it is part of a class (a class is a concept in object-oriented programming which we will cover in subsequent chapters) and how you import it, we can call a function simply by typing the name of the function or by using the dot notation. Some functions require us to pass data in for them to perform their tasks. These data are known as arguments and we pass them to the function by enclosing their values in parentheses `()` separated by commas.

For instance, to use the `print()` function for displaying text on the screen, we call it by typing `print("Hello World")` where `print` is the name of the function and "Hello World" is the argument.

On the other hand, to use the `replace()` function for manipulating text strings, we have to type

```
newString = "Hello World".replace("World", "Universe")
```

where `replace` is the name of the function and "World" and "Universe" are the arguments. The string before the dot (i.e. "Hello World") is the string that will be affected. Hence, "Hello World" will be changed to "Hello Universe".

Some functions may return a result after performing their tasks. In this case, the `replace()` function returns the string "Hello Universe", which we then assign to newString. If you print `newString` using the following statement

```
print(newString)
```

you'll get

```
Hello Universe
```

## 7.2 Defining Your Own Functions

We can define our own functions in Python and reuse them throughout the program. The syntax for defining a function is as follows:

```
def functionName(list of parameters):
    code detailing what the function should do
    return [expression]
```

There are two keywords here, `def` and `return`

`def` tells the program that the indented code from the next line onwards is part of the function. `return` is the keyword that we use to return an answer from the function. There can be more than one return statements in a function. However, once the function executes a return statement, the function will exit. If your function does not need to return any value, you can omit the return statement. Alternatively, you can write `return` or `return None`.

Let us now define our first function. Suppose we want to determine if a given number is a prime number. Here's how we can define the function using the modulus (`%`) operator we learned in Chapter 3.4 and the `for` loop and `if` statement we learned in Chapter 6.

```
def checkIfPrime(numberToCheck):
    for x in range(2, numberToCheck):
        if (numberToCheck%x == 0):
            return False
    return True
```

The function above has one parameter called `numberToCheck`. Parameters are variables that are used to store the arguments that we pass in to the function.

Lines 2 and 3 uses a `for` loop to divide the parameter `numberToCheck` by all numbers from 2 to `numberToCheck - 1` to determine if the remainder is zero. If the remainder is zero, `numberToCheck` is not a prime number. Line 4 will `return False` and the function will exit.

If by last iteration of the `for` loop, none of the division gives a remainder of zero, the function will reach Line 5, and return `True`. The function will then exit.

To use this function, we type `checkIfPrime(13)` and assign it to a variable like this

```
answer = checkIfPrime(13)
```

Here we are passing 13 as the argument, which will be stored in `numberToCheck`. The for loop then runs to check if `numberToCheck` is prime and return either `True` or `False`. We can print the answer by typing `print(anser)`. We'll get the output: `True`.

## 7.3 Variable Scope

An important concept to understand when defining a function is the concept of variable scope. Variables defined inside a function are treated differently than variables defined outside. There are two main differences.

Firstly, any variable declared inside a function is only accessible within the function. These are known as local variables. Any variable declared outside a function is known as a global variable and is accessible anywhere in the program.

To understand this, try the code below:

```
message1 = "Global Variable"

def myFunction():
    print("\nINSIDE THE FUNCTION")
    # Global variables are accessible inside a function
    print(message1)
    # Declaring a local variable
    message2 = "Local Variable"
    print(message2)

'''
Calling the function
Note that myFunction() has no parameters.
Hence, when we call this function,
we use a pair of empty parentheses.
'''

myFunction()

print("\nOUTSIDE THE FUNCTION")

# Global variables are accessible outside function
print(message1)

# Local variables are NOT accessible outside function.
print(message2)

```

If you run the program, you will get the output below.

```
INSIDE THE FUNCTION
Global Variable
Local Variable

OUTSIDE THE FUNCTION
Global Variable
NameError: name 'message2' is not defined
```

In the code above, `message1` is a global variable while `message2` is a local variable declared inside the function `myFunction()`. Within the function, both the local and global variables are accessible. Outside the function, the local variable `message2` is no longer accessible. We get a `NameError` when we try to access it outside the function.

The second concept to understand about variable scope is that if a local variable shares the same name as a global variable, any code inside the function is accessing the local variable. Any code outside is accessing the global variable. Try running the code below

```
message1 = "Global Variable (shares same name as a local variable)"

def myFunction():
    message1 = "Local Variable (shares same name as a global variable)"
    print("\nINSIDE THE FUNCTION")
    print(message1)

# Calling the function
myFunction()

# Printing message1 OUTSIDE the function
print("\nOUTSIDE THE FUNCTION")
print(message1)
```

You'll get the output as follows:

```
INSIDE THE FUNCTION
Local Variable (shares same name as a global variable)

OUTSIDE THE FUNCTION
Global Variable (shares same name as a local variable)
```

When we print `message` inside the function, it prints "Local Variable (shares same name as a global variable)" as it is printing the local variable. When we print it outside, it is accessing the global variable and hence prints "Global Variable (shares same name as a local variable)".

## 7.4 Default Parameter Values

Now that we understand how functions and variable scope work, let us look at some interesting variations that Python allows when defining a function. First, let's look at default values.

Python allows us to define default values for the parameters of a function. If a parameter has a default value, we do not have to pass in any value for the parameter when calling the method. For instance, suppose a function has 5 parameters a,b,c,d and e. We can define the function as

```
def someFunction(a, b, c=1, d=2, e=3):
    print(a,b,c,d,e)
```

Here, we assign default values for the last three parameters. All parameters with default values must be placed at the end of the parameter list. In other words, we cannot define a function as follows because `r` comes after `q` which has a default value:

```
def someIncorrectFunction(p, q=1, r): # Not valid
    print(p,q,r)
```

To call `someFunction()`, we can write

```
someFunction(10,20)
```

we'll get

```
10,20,1,2,3
```

We do not have to pass in any values for c,d and e.

If we write

```
someFunction(10,20,30,40)
```

we'll get

```
10,20,30,40,3
```

The two additional arguments that we pass in (30 and 40) are assigned to the parameters with default values in order. Hence, 30 replaces the default value for c while 40 replaces d.

## 7.5 Variable Length Argument List

In addition to having default values for parameters, Python also allows us to pass a variable number of arguments to a function. This is very useful if we do not know the number of arguments a function has in advance. For instance, we may have a function that adds a series of numbers, but we do not know how many numbers there are in advance. In cases like this, we can use the `*` symbol. The example below shows how this can be done.

```
def addNumbers(*num):
    sum = 0
    for i in num:
        sum = sum + i
    print(sum)
```

When we add a single asterisk in front of num, we are telling the compiler that num stores a variable-length argument list that contains several items.

The function then loops through the argument to find the sum of all the numbers and return the answer.

To call the function, we write

```
addNumbers(1,2,3,4,5)
```

we'll get 15 as the output. We can also add more numbers by writing

```
addNumbers(1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8)
```

we'll get 36 as the output.

As we can see in the examples above, when we add an asterisk in front of a parameter name, we can pass in a variable number of arguments to the function. This is known as a non-keyworded variable length argument list.

If we want to pass in a keyworded variable length argument list to the function, we can use double asterisks.

For instance, consider the following example:

```
def printMemberAge(**age):
    for i, j in age.items():
        print("Name = %s, Age = %s"%(i,j))
```

This function has a parameter called age. The double asterisks denote that this parameter stores a keyworded variable length argument list, which is essentially a dictionary. The `for` loop then loops through the argument and prints out the values. To call the function, we can write

```
printMemberAge(Peter = 5, John = 7)
```

we'll get

```
Name = Peter, Age = 5
Name = John, Age = 7
```

If we write

```
printMemberAge(Peter = 5, John = 7, Yvonne = 10)
```

we'll get

```
Name = Peter, Age = 5
Name = John, Age = 7
Name = Yvonne, Age = 10
```

If our function uses a normal argument (also known as a format argument), a non-keyworded variable length argument list and a keyworded variable length argument list, we must define function using the following order:

```
def someFunction1(fargs, *args, **kwargs):
```

That is, the formal argument must come first, followed by the non-keyworded argument and the keyworded argument in that order.


## 7.6 Importing Modules

Python comes with a large number of built-in functions. These functions are saved in files known as modules. To use the built-in codes in Python modules, we have to import them into our program first. We do that by the `import` keyword. There are three ways to do it.

The first way is to import the entire module by writing `import moduleName`.

For instance, to import the built-in random module that comes with Python, we write `import random`.

To use the `randrange()` function in the random module, we write `randm.randrange(1,10)`.

If you find it too troublesome to write random each time you use the function, you can import the module by writing `import random as r` (where `r` is any name of your choice). Now to use `randrange()` function, you simply write `r.randrange(1,10)`.

The third way to import modules is to import specific functions from the module by writing

```
from moduleName import name1[,name2[,...nameN]]
```

For instance, to import the `randrange()` function from the random module, we write `from random import randrange`. If we want to import more than one function, we separate them with a comma. To import the `randrange()` and `randInt()` functions, we write `from random import randrange, randint`. To use the function now, we do not have to use the dot notation anymore. Just write `randrange(1,10)`.

## 7.7 Creating our Own Module

