# Chapter 9: Object Oriented Programming Part 1

We have covered a fair bit so far. In the next two chapters, we are going to look at another important concept in Python programming - the concept of object-oriented programming.

In this chapter, we'll learn what object-oriented programming is and how we can write our own classes and create objects from them. In the next chapter, we'll discuss inheritance and cover some other advanced topics in object-oriented programming.

Let's get started!

## 9.1 What is Object-Oriented Programming?

Simply stated, object-oriented programming is an approach to programming that breaks a programming problem into objects that interact with each other.

Objects are created from templates known as classes. You can think of a class as the blueprint of a building. An object is the actual "building" that we build based on the blueprint.

To understand how object-oriented programming works, let's start by coding a simple class together.

## 9.2 Writing our own class

To write our own class, we use the class keyword followed by the name of the class.

For instance, to create a Staff class, we write

```
class Staff:
    # contents of the class
```

It is common practice to use PascalCasing when naming our classes. PascalCasing refers to the practice of capitalizing the first letter of each word, including the first word (e.g. ThisIsAClassName). This is the convention that we'll be following in the book.

A class consists of variables and functions. As we learned in previous chapters, variables are for storing data while functions are code blocks that perform certain tasks for us. If a function exists within a class, it is more commonly referred to as a method.

You can think of a class as a template for grouping related data and methods together.

For instance, supposed we have a class called Staff. This class can be used to store all the relevant information about a staff in the company. Within the class, we can declare two variables to store the name and position of the staff. In addition, we can also code a method called `calculatePay()` to calculate the pay of the staff.

Let's look at how to do that.

Fire up IDLE and create a new file called `classdemo.py`. Add the following code to `classdemo.py`.

```
class Staff:
    def __init__(self, pPosition, pName, pPay):
        self.position = pPosition
        self.name = pName
        self.pay = pPay
        print('Creating Staff object')
    
    def __str__(self):
        return "Position = %s, Name = %s, Pay = %d"%(self.position, self.name, self.py)
    
    def calculatePay(self):
        prompt = '\nEnter number of hours worked for %s:'%(self.name)
        hours = input(prompt)
        prompt = 'Enter the hourly rate of %s:'%(self.name)
        hourlyRate = input(prompt)
        self.pay = int(hours) * int(hourlyRate)
        return self.py
```

In the code above, we first define a class called Staff by writing

```
class Staff:
```

Next, we define a special method called `__init__` for the class. This is known as the initializer of the class. It is always named init with two underscores in front and at the back. Python comes with a large number of special methods. All special methods have two underscores in front and at the back of their names. We'll discuss special methods in Chapter 10.4 later.

An initializer is called whenever an object of the class is created. Do not worry if you don't know what this means. We'll learn how to create an object of the class later.

For now, all that you have to know is an initializer is frequently used to initialize the variables (i.e give them initial values) in the class.

In our class, we have three variables - position, name and pay. These variables are known as instance variables, in contrast to local variables (covered in Chapter 7.3) and class variables (to be covered later in Chapter 9.6). Instance variables are variables that are prefixed with a `self` keyword.

The `self` keyword is hard to explain at this stage. Simply stated, `self` refers to an instance itself. This statement probably sounds abstract to you. We'll explore the meaning of self in a later section. For now, just know that when we want to refer to instance variables in the class, we need to add self in front of the variable names. In addition, most methods in a class have self as the first parameter.

The three statements below assign three parameters of the `__init__` method (pPosition, pName and pPay) to the instance variables to initialize them.

```
self.position = pPosition
self.name = pName
self.pay = pPay
```

After initializing the three instance variables, we print out a simple statement 'Creating Staff object'. That's all that the initializer does.

Writing an initializer is optional if you do not wish to initialize the instance variables when you create the object. You can always initialize them later.

Let's move on to the next method - `__str__`

`__str__` is another special method that is commonly included when we code a class. We use it to return a human readable string that represents the class. In our example, we simply return a string that gives the values of the three instance variables. We'll look at how we use this method later.

Now, let's move on to the `calculatePay()` method.

`calculatePay()` is a method that is used to calculate the pay of a staff. You'll notice that it is very similar to a function, except for the parameter `self`. Indeed, a method is almost identical to a function except that a method exists inside a class and most methods have `self` as a parameter.

Within the `calculatePay()` method, we first prompt the user to enter the number of hours worked for the staff. Next, we prompt for the hourly rate and calculate the pay based on these two values. We then assign the result to the instance variable `self.py` and return the value of `self.pay`.

You may notice that in this method, we do not add self in front of some variables (such as prompt, hours and hourlyRate). This is because these variables are local variables and only exist within the `calculatePay()` method. We do not need to add `self` in front of local variables.

That's all there is to the class that we wrote. To recap, our class has the following components

### Instance Variables

```
position
name
pay
```

### Methods
```
__init__
__str__
calculatePay()
```

## 9.3 Instantiating an Object

Next, let's learn how to use this class.

In order to use the class, we have to create an object from it. This is known as instantiating an object. An object is also known as an instance. Although there are some differences between an object and an instance, there are more semantic differences and the two words are frequently used interchangeably.

Let's instantiate a Staff object now. We will do that in the Python Shell. Before we can use the Staff class, we need to first run it. Select `Run > Run Module` from the `classdemo.py` file to run it. This will open the Python Shell.

Now we are ready to instantiate a Staff object.

To do that, we write

```
officeStaff1 = Staff('Basic', 'Yvonne', 0)
```

This is a bit similar to how we declare variable where we write

```
userAge = 10
```

In this case, `officeStaff1` is the variable name. However, since `officeStaff1` is not an integer, we do not assign a number to it. Instead, we write `Staff('Basic', 'Yvonne', 0)` on the right hand side. When we do that, we are essentially asking the Staff class to create a Staff object and to use the `__init__` method to initialize the instance variables in the class.

Notice that we have three values 'Basic', 'Yvonne' and 0 inside the parentheses? These are for the parameters pPosition, pName and pPay in the `__init__` method that we coded earlier. We use these three values to initialize the instance variables position, name and pay respectively. You might be wondering what happened to the first parameter `self`? We do not need to pass in anything for the parameter `self`. It is a special parameter and Python will add it for you automatically when calling the method.

After we create the object, we assign it to `officeStaff1`.

Try typing the following statement into Shell and press enter.

```
officeStaff1 = Staff('Basic', 'Yvolume', 0)
```

You'll see the message

```
Creating Staff object
```

displayed on the screen. This indicates that the initializer is being called.

Now that we have created an object of the Staff class, we can use it to access the instance variables and methods inside the class. To do that, we use the dot operator after the object's name to access any instance variable or method in the Staff class.

For instance, to access the instance variable name, we type

```
officeStaff1.name
```

As we are accessing the variable using Python Shell, we do not need to use the `print()` function to display the value. However, if we are not using the Python shell, we'll have to use the `print()` function. We'll see an example of that later in Chapter 9.6.

Try adding the following lines to Shell to see what happens.

### To access the variable name

```
officeStaff1.name
```

Output: `Yvonne`

## To access the variable postion

```
officeStaff1.position
```

Output: `Basic`

### To change variable position and print it again

```
# change variable position
officeStaff1.position = 'Manager'

# print position again
officeStaff1.position
```

Output: `Manager`

### To access the variable pay
```
officeStaff1.pay
```

Output: `0`

### To use calculatePay() method to calculate pay

```
officeStaff1.calculatePay()
```

Output:
```
Enter number of hours worked for Yvonne: 10
Enter the hourly rate fo Yvonne: 15
```

### To print variable pay again

```
officeStaff1.pay
```

Output: `150`

### To print a string representation of officeStaff1

```
print(officeStaff1)
```

Output:
```
Position = Manager, Name = Yvonne, Pay = 150
```

To print a string representation of the object, we pass in the object's name to the built-in `print()` function. When we do this, Python will call the `__str__` method that we coded earlier. In our example, we coded it to return the position, name and pay of `officeStaff1`.


## 9.4 Properties

Now that we have a basic understanding of classes and objects, let us move on to discuss properties.

In the examples above, we notice that we can access an object's instance variables using the dot operator. This makes it easy for us to read the variables and modify them when necessary. However, this flexibility also poses some problems. For instance, we may accidentally change the position of `officeStaff` to a non-existent position. Or we may change the pay of `officeStaff` to an incorrect amount.

To prevent such errors from occurring, we can use properties. Properties provide us with a way to check the values of the changes that we want to make before allowing the change to occur.

To demonstrate how properties work, we'll add one for the variable position. Specifically, we'll add a property to ensure that the variable position can only be set to either 'Basic' or 'Manager'.

However, before we do that, we want to first change the name of the instance variable from position to `_position`. Adding a single underscore in front of a variable name is a customary way to signal to other programmers that they should not touch this variable directly.

In Python programming, there is a commonly used phrase that says "we're all consenting adults here". We are all expected to behave like an adult. Adding a single underscore in front of a variable tells other programmers that you're trusting them to behave responsibly and not access that variable directly unless they have a compelling reason to. However technically, there is nothing stopping them from accessing the variable. If they so desire, they can still access it by writing

```
officeStaff1._position
```

Having said that, let's just make the following changes to the `classdemo.py` file to let other 'consenting adults' know they should not access position directly:

Change the line

```
self.position = pPosition
```

in `__init__` to

```
self._position = pPosition
```

and the line

```
return "Position = %s, Name = %s, Pay = %d"%(self.position, self.name, self.pay)
```

in `__str__` to

```
return "Position = %s, Name = %s, Pay = %d"%(self._position, self.name, self.pay)
```

Next, let's look at how to add a property for the `_position` variable.

Add the following lines to the `Staff` class `classdemo.py`.

```
@property
def position(self):
    print("Getter Method")
    return self._position

@position.setter
def position(self, value):
    if value == 'Manager' or value == 'Basic':
        self._position = value
    else:
        print('Position is invalid. No changes made.')
```

Remember to indent the lines above when adding them to the `Staff` class. If you do not indent them, they do not belong to the `Staff` class.

The first line above (@property) is known as a decorator. We won't go into details about what a decorator is, but simply put, it allows us to alter the functionality of the method that follows. In this case, it changes the first `position()` method to a property.

This means that it is telling the compiler that whenever users type

```
officeStaff1.position
```

it should use the `position()` method that follows to get the value.

This method simply prints the message "Getter Method" and returns the value of the variable `_position`. Due to the `@property` decorator that changes the method to a property, we do not have to type `officeStaff1.position()` to access the method. We access it like a variable without parentheses.

Next, we have another decorator `@position.setter` followed by a second `position()` method.

This decorator tells the compiler that when users try to update the value of `_position` by writing something like

```
officeStaff1.position = 'Manager'
```

it should use the `position()` method that follows to update the value.

This second `position()` method is known as a setter method. It has a parameter called value that is assigned to `_position` as long as value is either 'Manager' or 'Basic'. If value is neither of these, the message 'Position is invalid. No changes made.' is displayed.

Now, save the file and run it again.

Type the following statement into Shell:

```
officeStaff1 = Staff('Basic', 'Yvonne', 0)
```

To access the position of `officeStaff1`, we write

```
officeStaff1.position
```

We'll get

```
Getter Method
'Basic'
```

as the output.

Previously when we typed

```
officeStaff1.position
```

we were accessing the variable position directly. Now when we type

```
officeStaff1.position
```

we are no longer accessing the variable. Instead, we are accessing the getter method of the position property. This is illustrated by the fact that we get an extra line (Getter Method) as the output.

It is not a coincidence that we name the property position, which is the original name of the variable before we changed it to `_position`.

When we do it this way, users can access the position of the staff the same way they were used to, by writing `officeStaff1.postion`. Even though we made a number of changes to `classdemo.py` in the back end, end users are not affected by these changes (unless they try to change the position of the staff to an invalid value).

Now, let's try to change the position of `officeStaff1`. Type the following into Shell

```
officeStaff1.position = 'Manager'
```

This changes the position of the staff to 'Manager'.

Verify that by typing

```
officeStaff1.position
```

You'll get

```
Getter Method
'Manager'
```

as the output.

Next, let's try to change the position to 'CEO'. Type the following into Shell

```
officeStaff1.position = 'CEO'
```

You'll get

```
Position is invalid. No changes made.
```

as the output.

This demonstrates that the setter method has prevented us from changing the position of a staff to an invalid value. You can verify that position is not changed by typing

```
officeStaff1.position
```

again. You'll get

```
Getter Method
'Manager'
```

as the output.

## 9.5 Name Mangling

Next, let's move on to discuss the concept of name mangling in Python.

In the previous section, we mentioned that if we do not want other programmers to access a certain variable directly, we indicate that by adding a single underscore in front. We then code properties to control their access. However, even if we do so, other programmers can still access that variable if they want to. In the previous example, they can simply type

```
officeStaff1._position
```

In Python, there is no way to really hide a variable and prevent other users from accessing it. However, if you really want to send a strong signal to other programmers that a certain variable should not be modified, you can add double underscores to the front of the variable name.

For instance, try typing the following code into the Python shell:

```
class A:
    def __init__(self):
        self.__x = 5
        self.__y = 6
```

The code above defines a class called A. This class has two variables `__x` (with double underscores) and `_y` (with single underscore)

Next, press enter twice and key in the line below to instantiate a class A object.

```
varA = A()
```

Now we shall try to access the two variables. If you type

```
varA._y
```

you'll get

```
6
```

as the output. However, if you type

```
varA.__x
```

you'll get an error.

Why is that so? This is because when you add double underscores in front, Python does what is known as name mangling. Essentially, when the Python compiler encounters a variable with two leading underscores, it transforms the name by adding a single underscore and the class name in front of the variable name. In other words, when it sees `__x`, it changes the name to `_A__x`.

This means that when we add a double underscore in front of a variable name, other programmers cannot access the variable by simply typing the variable name (`__x` in this case). This makes it harder for them to access the variable. However, if they so desire, they can still access it by typing

```
varA._A__x
```

They'll get 5 as the output.

In other words, there is no way to absolutely restrict access to a variable in Python. You can use underscores to make it more difficult to access, but a determined programmer can still access it. As we mentioned earlier, in Python, we are all consenting adults. Hence, we are expected to behave responsibly and not modify variables that we are told not to.

## 9.6 What is self

Now that we have an understanding of how classes work, let's explore the meaning of `self`.

In order to explain `self`, we have to first discuss the concept of class vs instance variables.

A class variable belongs to the class and is shared by all instances of that class. It is defined outside any method in the class.

An instance variable, on the other hand, is defined inside a method and belongs to an instance. It is always prefixed with the `self` keyword.

Let's consider an example. Supposed Peter and John both work for a company called ProgrammingLab. We can create a class called `ProgStaff` to store this information. Create a new file called `selfdemo.py` and add the following code to it:

```
class ProgStaff:
    companyName = 'ProgrammingLab'

    def __init__(self, pSalary):
        self.salary = pSalary

    def printInfo(self):
        print("Company name is", ProgStaff.companyName)
        print("Salary is", self.salary)

peter = ProgStaff(2500)
john = ProgStaff(2500)
```

The first few lines of the code above defines a class called `ProgStaff`.

This class has a variable called `companyName` that is not defined inside any method.

Next, it has an `__init__` method. Inside the `__init__` method, it has a variable called `salary`. This variable is prefixed with the `self` keyword.

Finally, it also has a method called `printInfo()` that has `self` as a parameter. This method simply prints the value of `companyName` and `salary`.

After defining the class, we created two instances of the `ProgStaff` class called `peter` and `john`. We do not indent these two instruction statements as they are not part of the `Staff` class.

Now, let's explore the difference between a class and instance variable.

Currently, the name of the company is 'ProgrammingLab'. Suppose the name is subsequently changed to 'ProgrammingSchool', we update it as follows:

```
ProgStaff.companyName = 'ProgrammingSchool'
```

Notice that we prefix the variable `companyName` with `ProgStaff`. This change affects all instances of the `ProgStaff` class (peter and john in this case).

Add the following lines to `selfdemo.py` to verify that.

```
ProgStaff.companyName = 'ProgrammingSchool'
print(peter.companyName)
print(john.companyName)
```

Notice that in the code above, as we are not typing directly into the Python Shell, we have to use the `print()` function to display the value of `companyName` for `peter` and `john`.

Save the file and run the program. You'll get the following output:

```
ProgrammingSchool
ProgrammingSchool
```

Next, suppose the salary of peter is increased to 2700. We update it as follows:

```
peter.salary = 2700
```

This change only affects the instance 'peter'. We can verify it by printing the salary of peter and john. Add the following lines to `selfdemo.py` and run the program:

```
peter.salary = 2700
print(peter.salary)
print(john.salary)
```

You'll get

```
2700
2500
```

as the output. Only the salary of peter is updated.

In summary, the main differences between a class and instance variable are:

### Class Variable

- 1. A class variable is defined outside any method in the class
- 2. It can be accessed outside the class using the class name
- 3. Changing it affects all instances of the class

### Instance Variable

- 1. An instance variable is defined inside a method in the class and prefixed with the `self` keyword.
- 2. It can be accessed outside the class using the name of the instance.
- 3. Changing it only affects the specific instance

In our example, `companyName` is a class variable while `salary` is an instance variable.

Now that we understand what class and instance variables are, let us move on to discuss the `printInfo()` method in the `ProgStaff` class.

This method is known as an instance method. An instance method is a method that has `self` as one of its parameters. If the method has more than one parameter, `self` must be the first parameter.

Inside the method, we use the class name to access the class variable `companyName`. In contrast, we use the `self` keyword to access the instance variable `salary`.

`self` essentially represents an instance of the class. As different instances have different names and we do not know those names yet (as we have not created them yet), we use the `self` keyword to represent them inside the class.

To call the `printInfor()` method, we type

```
john.printInfo()
```

When we call the instance method this way, Python passes in john to the `self` parameter implicitly for us. We do not have to do it ourselves.

Alternatively, if we prefer, we can also use the class name to call the instance method. When we do it this way, we have to pass in the instance john ourselves as shown below:

```
ProgStaff.printInfo(john)
```

Both methods give us the same output. Try adding the two statements above to `selfdemo.py` and run the program. You'll get

```
Company name is ProgrammingSchool
Salary is 2500
```

as the output

## 9.7 Class and Static Methods

Now that we understand what `self` means, let us move on to discuss class and static methods.

In the previous section, we mentioned that an instance method is a method that has `self` as a parameter. This is the most common tpe of method and is the only type of method that we've been using so far.

In addition to instance methods, Python also has class and static methods. These types of methods are rarely used. Hence, we'll only do a brief discussion of them here. To start, let's create a file called `methoddemo.py`. Add the following code to the file.

```
class MethodDemo:
    a = 1
    
    @classmethod
    def classM(cls):
        print("Class Method. cls.a = ", cls.a)

    @staticmethod
    def staticM():
        print("Static method")
```

This class has a class variable `a` and two methods - `classM()` and `staticM()`.

The first method, `classM()`, is a class method.

To define a class method, we need to use the `@classmethod` decorator to inform Python that what follows is a class method.

A class method is a method that has a class object (instead of `self`) as the first parameter. `cls` is commonly used to represent that class object.

`cls` is sort of similar to `self`. The main difference is `self` refers to an instance while `cls` refers to a class. As `cls` refers to the class itself, we can use it to access our class variables. In our example, we used it to access the class variable `a`.

To call a class method, we can either use the class name or the instance name. In both cases, Python automatically passes in the class as the first argument to the method.

For instance, to call `classM()` in the example above, we can write

```
MethodDemo.classM()
```

Alternatively, we can instantiate a MethodDemo object and use it to call the method as shown below:

```
md1 = MethodDemo()
md1.classM()
```

Add the three statements above to `methoddemo.py` and run the program.

You'll get

```
Class Method. cls.a = 1
Class Method. cls.a = 1
```

as the output.

Besides instance and class methods, Python also has static methods. A static method is a method that is not passed an instance or a class. It does not have `self` or `cls` as the first parameter. To define a static method, we use the `@staticmethod` decorator. To call a static method, we can eithe ruse the class name or the instance name. For instance, to call `staticM()` in the example above, we can write

```
md1.staticM()
```

or 

```
MethodDemo.staticM()
```

We'll get

```
Static method
```

in both cases.

Class and static methods are not very commonly used. In most cases, instance methods are all that is required in a Python class.

## 9.8 Importing a class

We've covered quite a few object-oriented concepts in this chapter. Before we end this chapter, let us learn how to import a class into an application.

Like what we learned in Chapter 7 regarding modules, a class can also be created as a separate file and imported into an application. To do that, we need to save the class as a separate file with the `.py` extension. We then import it using the file name.

For instance, suppose we have the following code in a file called `myclass.py`.

```
class SomeClass:
    def __init__(self):
        print("This is SomeClass")
    def someMethod(self, a):
        print('The value of a is', a)
        self.b = 5

class SomeOtherClass:
    def __init__(self):
        print('This is SomeOtherClass')
```

This file consists of two classes: `SomeClass` and `SomeOtherClass`. We can create another `.py` file and import these two classes using the file name (`myclass`). We can then use this file name to access the classes inside the file.

Let's create another file and name it `importdemo.py`. Add the following code to the file and run it.

```
import myclass

sc = myclass.SomeClass()
sc.someMethod(100)

soc = myclass.SomeOtherClass()
```

You'll get

```
This is SomeClass
The value of a is 100
This is SomeOtherClass
```

as the output.

In the code above, we instantiated the objects by prefixing the class name with the file name, such as `myclass.SomeClass()` so that the compiler knows that `SomeClass` is in the file `myclass.py`.

Alternatively, you can choose to import using the statement below:

```
from myclass import SomeClass, SomeOtherClass
```

If you do it this way, you do not need to prefix the file name when instantiating an object. For instance, to instantiate a SomeClass object, you simply write

```
sc = SomeClass()
```