# Chapter 10: Object Oriented Programming Part 2

Now, let us move on to some of the more advanced topics in object-oriented programming. In this chapter, we'll learn about inheritance, polymorphism and overloading operators.

## 10.1 Inheritance

Inheritance is one of the key concepts of object-oriented programming. Simply stated, inheritance allows us to create a new class from an existing class so that we can effectively reuse existing code.

## 10.2 Writing the Child Class

To understand how inheritance works, le us expand on the Staff class that we wrote earlier in Chapter 9. To recap, our `Staff` class has the following attributes:

### Instance Variables

```
_position
name
pay
```

### Methods

```
__init__
__str__
calculatePay()
```

This class served us well in Chapter 9 when we used it to calculate the pay of a basic staff who is paid on an hourly basis.

However, suppose in addition to having basic staff, the company also has a manager who has a slightly different pay scheme. For instance, suppose the company has a manager who earns an allowance on top of a basic hourly pay, how can we modify the class to accommodate this?

The best way to do this is to create a sub class. A sub class is also known as a derived class or a child class. The class from which it is derived is known as a base class, a super class or a parent class.

The main feature of a sub class is that it inherits all the variables and methods from the parent class. In other words, it can use those variables and methods as if they are part of its own code without having to code them again. In addition, a sub class can have additional variables and methods that do not exist in the parent class. Let's look at how this can be done.

We shall create a sub class called ManagementStaff. Add the following line to `classdemo.py`:

```
class ManagementStaff(staff):
```

Here, we are creating a new class called `ManagementStaff`. We indicate that `ManagementStaff` is a subclass of `Staff` by adding the word `Staff` in parentheses after the class name.

Next, we shall code the `__init__` method for the subclass.

One of the main reasons for coding subclasses is to facilitate code reuse. One way to do it is to use a built-in function called `super()`.

Let's look at how to do that. Earlier in Chapter 9, we have already coded an `__init__` method for the `Staff` class. This method initializes the three instance variables `_position`, name and pay. Now we shall make use of this method in the sub class.

Add the following method to the `ManagementStaff` class.

```
def __init__(self, pName, pPay, pAllowance, pBonus):
    super().__init__('Manager', pName, pPay)
    self.allowance = pAllowance
    self.bonus = pBonus
```

The `__init__` method in `ManagementStaff` has five parameters - `self, pName, pPay, pAllowance` and `pBonus`.

Within the method, the first line uses the `super()` function to call the `__init__` method in the base class. The `super()` function is a pre-built function that we can use in a sub class to call a method in the super class.

In Python 3, when we use `super()` to call a method in the parent class, we do not have to pass in any value for the self parameter.

Hence, in our example, we only need to pass in three values (the string 'Manager' and the parameters pName and pPay) to the base class `__init__` method. The base class method will be called and the string 'Manager' will be assigned to `_position` while `pName` and `pPay` will be assigned to `name` and `pay` respectively.

If you are using Python 2, the syntax for using the `super()` method is slightly different. To use `super()` Python 2, you need to pass in the sub class name and the keyword `self`. In other words, in our example, you need to write

```
super(ManagementStaff, self).__init__('Manager', pName, pPay)
```

This syntax is still supported in Python 3 and some programmers choose to stick to this syntax for backwards compatibility. 

Besides using the `super()` function, we can also use parent class name to call a method in the base class. To do that, we write

```
Staff.__init__(self, 'Manager', pName, pPay)
```

All three methods above achieve the same output in this example. All has its pros and cons and a debate of which is better is beyond the scope of the book. In most cases, deciding on which one to use is largely a matter of preference.

After calling the `__init__` method in the base class, the sub class `__init__` method uses the two statements below to assign the parameters `pAllowance` and `pBonus` to the instance variables allowance and bonus respectively.

```
self.allowance = pAllowance
self.bonus = pBonus
```

After calling the `__init__` method in the base class, the sub class `__init__` method uses the two statements below to assign the parameters `pAllowance` and `pBonus` to the instance variables `allowance` and `bonus` respectively.

```
self.allowance = pAllowance
self.bonus = pBonus
```

These two instance variables only exist in the subclass. They do not exist in the super class. That's all for the `__init__` method in the sub class.

Now, let us code a method to calculate the pay of a management staff. Add the following method to `ManagementStaff`.

```
def calculatePay(self):
    basicPay = super().calculatePay()
    self.pay = basicPay + self.allowance
    return self.pay
```

Notice that this method uses the super() function again to call the `calculatePay()` method in the base class. After calling the base class method, we assign the result to the variable basicPay. basicPay is a local variable that only exists within the `calculatePay()` method. Hence, you do not need to prefix it with the keyword `self`.

Next, we add the value of `basicPay` to the instance variable allowance to calculate the total pay of the management staff. We then assign it to the instance variable pay and return this value in the next statement.

That concludes the `calculatePay()` method in the sub class.

Recall that we mentioned earlier that a sub class inherits all the variables and methods from its base class? This means that we do not need to code a new `calculatePay()` method for the subclass; it already exists. However, if we choose to code a new version for the subclass, this new version replaces the version that the sub class inherited. This is known as `overriding`, which is what we did in this example.

Now, let us add a new method to the subclass. Suppose a management staff is also entitled to performance bonus if his/her performance grade is an `A`. To calculate the performance bonus of a management staff, we can add a new method to the ManagementStaff class:

```
def calculatePerfBonus(self):
    prompt = 'Enter performance grade for %s:'%(self.name)
    grade = input(prompt)
    if (grade == 'A'):
        self.bonus = 1000
    else:
        self.bonus = 0
    return self.bonus
```

This method first prompts the user to enter the performance grade for the management staff. It then assigns either 1000 or 0 to the instance variable bonus based on the performance grade entered. Finally, it returns the value of bonus in the next statement.

With that, our ManagementStaff class is complete. The class has the following content:

### Instance Variables

Inherited from `Staff`:

```
_position
name
pay
```

Declared in `ManagementStaff`:

```
allowance
bonus
```

### Methods

Inherited and not overridden:

```
__str__
```

Inherited and Overridden:

```
__init__
calculatePay()
```

Declared in `ManagementStaff`:

```
calculatePerfBonus()
```

Before we end this section, we shall derive one more sub class from Staff. This time, the derived class is called `BasicStaff`. The code is shown below:

```
class BasicStaff(Staff):
    def __init__(self, pName, pPay):
        super().__init__('Basic', pName, pPay)
```

This sub class only overrides the `__init__` method in the base class. The `__init__` method passes in the string 'Basic' to the base class initializer so that the instance variable `_position` will be assigned automatically when we instantiate a `BasicStuff` object. Other than that, the sub class inherits all other variables and methods from the base class. The class has the following content:

### Instance Variables

Inherited from `Staff`:

```
_position
name
pay
```

### Methods

Inherited and not overridden:

```
__str__
calculatePay()
```

Inherited and Overridden:

```
__init__
```

## 10.3 Instantiating a Child Object

Now that we have coded our child classes, le tus create a `separate.py` file to make use of these classes.

Create a new file in IDLE and name it `inheritancedemo.py`. Add the following lines to the file:

```
import classdemo

peter = classdemo.BasicStaff('Peter', 0)
john = classdemo.ManagementStaff('John', 0, 1000, 0)

print(peter)
print(john)

print('Peter\'s Pay = ', peter.calculatePay())

print('John\'s Pay = ', john.calculatePay())
print('John\'s Performance Bonus = ', john.calculatePerfBonus())
```

In the code above, we first import the three classes (Staff, ManagementStaff and BasicStaff) using the statement

```
import classdemo
```

Next, we instantiate two child objects -- peter and john - for the two subclasses BasicStaff and ManagementStaff respectively.

For peter, we passed in 'Peter' and 0 for the instance variables name and pay respectively.

For john, we passed in 'John', 0, 1000 and 0 for the instance variables name, pay, allowance and bonus respectively.

Next, we use the two objects to call the `__str__` method.

Although we did not code the `__str__` method in the two subclasses, we can still use this method as both subclasses have inherited the method from the base class. This facilitates code reuse as we do not need to rewrite the `__str__` method for both the child classes.

After calling the `__str__` method, we call the `calculatePay()` method for peter and john and display the information on the screen. Finally, we call the `calculatePerfBonus()` method for john. If we run the program and enter the relevant information when prompted, we'll get the following output:

```
Creating Staff object
Creating Staff object
Position = Basic, Name = Peter, Pay = 0
Position = Manager, Name = John, Pay = 0
Enter number of hours worked for Peter: 120
Enter the hourly rate for Peter: 15
Peter's Pay = 1800


Enter the number of hours worked for John: 150
Enter the hourly rate for John: 20
John's Pay = 4000
Enter performance grade for John: A
John's Performance Bonus = 1000
```

As peter uses the `calculatePay()` method inherited from the base class, the pay for peter is 1800 (i.e. 120*15). In contrast, the pay for john is 4000 as it uses the `calculatePay()` method in the `ManagementStaff` subclass. The `calculatePay()` method in the `ManagementStaff` subclass overrides the method in the base class. Hence, the pay is 150*20 + 1000 (i.e. an allowance of 1000 is added).

After we calculate the pay for peter and john, we calculate the performance bonus for john. As his performance grade is 'A', he is awarded a bonus of $1000.

If we try to use peter to call the `calculatePerfBonus()` method, we'll get an error as the `BasicStaff` class does not have the `calculatePerfBonus()` method. Try adding the line

```
print('Peter\'s Performance Bonus = ', peter.calculatePerfBonus())
```

to `inheritancedemo.py` and see what happens. You'll get an error message.

## 10.4 Python Special Methods

Now that we understand how inheritance and overriding works, let us move on to talk about special methods.

Previously, we mentioned in Chapter 9 that Python comes with a large number of special methods. These methods are also known as magic methods and are always surrounded by double underscores. Two of the magic methods that we have encountered so far are `__init__` and `__str__`.

One of the magical properties of a special method is that you do not invoke it directly. For instance, when you wanted to print information about the instance `officeStaff1` in Chapter 9, you do not write

```
print(officeStaff1.__str__())
```

Instead, you simply write

```
print(officeStaff1)
```

Python will invoke the necessary special method behind the scene.

Another property of special methods is that they can be overridden to suit our needs. The `__str__` method is commonly overridden to provide an more human readable string representation of a class.

Other methods that are commonly overridden are the `__add__`, `__sub__`, `__mul__`, and `__div__` methods. These methods allow us to modify standard operators such as the `+`, `-`, `*` and `/` signs so that they can do different things depending on what they are 'operating' on.

We have already encountered how the plus sign (+) can mean addition or concatenation. For instance, if we type

```
2 + 3
```

the `+` operator adds the two numbers to give us `5`.

However, if we type

```
'Hello' + 'World'
```

the `+` operator concatenates the two strings to give us 'Hello World'.

There is a special method for every operator sign. We can override the corresponding special method to provide even more meaning to them. This is known as overloading the operators. The special method for `+`, `-`, `*`, `/` are `__add__`, `__sub__`, `__mul__` and `__div__` respectively.

Let's try to overload the `+` operator for our `Staff` class.

Add the following method to `classdemo.py`. We'll add this method to the `Staff` class so that both the child classes can use it.

```
def __add__(self, other):
    return self.pay + other.pay
```

This method overrides the `__add__` method. It has two parameters `self` and `other`. `self` refers to one instance, `other` refers to another instance. It basically tells the compiler to add the `pay` variable of both instances and return the result.

To call the method, we use the `+` operator.

Add the following lines to `inheritancedemo.py`

```
totalPay = john + peter
print('\nTotal Pay for Both Staff = ', totalPay)
```

Run the program and key in 120, 15, 150, 20 and A when prompted. You'll get the same output as the previous section, with one additional line shown below:

```
Total Pay for Both Staff = 5800
```

## 10.5 Python Built-in Functions for Objects

We've covered most of the topics in object-oriented programming. Before we end this chapter, let's look at some special built in functions that Python has for objects. To explore some of these functions, let's consider the two classes below. Create a new file in IDLE and name it `objectfunctions.py`. Copy the following code into the file:

```
class ParentClass:
    def __init__(self):
        self.a = 1
        print("Parent Class Object Created")
    
    def someMethod(self):
        print("Hello")

class ChildClass(ParentClass):
    def __init__(self):
        print("Child Class Object Created")

parent = ParentClass()
child = ChildClass()
```

Now, we are ready to test some of the built-in Python functions below. Run the file to try the following commands in Python Shell.

### isinstance()

This function takes in two arguments. It checks if the first argument is an instance of the second argument (or an instance of a sub class of the second argument). The second argument can be a class or a built-in type in Python. It can also be a tuple consisting of more than one class or type.

If the second argument is not a valid class or type (or a tuple of classes or types), an exception is raised.

Try typing the following lines into Shell:

#### Example 1

```
isinstance(parent, ParentClass)
```

Output:

You'll get True as parent is an instance of ParentClass

#### Example 2

```
isinstance(5, int)
```

Output:

You'll get True as 5 is an instance of int. (int is a built-in type in Python for integers.)

#### Example 3

```
isinstance(child, ParentCLass)
```

Output:

You'll get True as child is an instance of ChildClass, which is a subclass of ParentClass.

#### Example 4

```
isinstance(parent, (ParentClass, int))
```

Output:

You'll get True as parent is an instance of ParentClass, which is one of the types in the tuple (ParentClass, int).

#### Example 5

```
isinstance(parent, ChildClass)
```

Output:

You'll get False as an instance of the parent class is not considered an instance of the child class.

#### Example 6

```
isinstance(parent, MyClass)
```

Output:

You'll get `NameError: name 'MyClass' is not defined` as MyClass is not a valid class. You can use the following code to manage such exceptions:

```
try:
    isinstance(parent, MyClass)
except NameError:
    print("No such class")
```

you'll get

```
No such class
```

as the output.

### issubclass()

This function takes in two arguments - the name of two classes or types. It checks if the first argument is a subclass of the second argument. The second argument can be a tuple. The function returns True if the first argument is a subclass of any of hte classes or types in the tuple. If the second argument is not a valid class or type, an exception is raised.

For instance, if you type

```
issubclass(ChildClass, ParentClass)
issubclass(ParentClass, ParentClass)
issubclass(ChildClass, int)
issubclass(ChildClass, (int, ParentClass))
```

you'll get

```
True
True
False
True
```

as the output. The second statement returns True as a class is considered a subclass of itself.


### hasattr()

This function tests if an instance has a certain attribute. An attribute can refer to both data (variables) and methods. It takes in two arguments. The first is the name of the object and the second is the name of the attribute. The name of the attribute is in the form of a string and hence has to be enclosed with single quotes. For instance, if we add the following lines to Shell

```
hasattr(parent, 'a')
hasattr(parent, 'someMethod')
hasattr(parent, 'b')
```

we'll get

```
True
True
False
```

as the output. This is because parent has the attributes 'a' and 'someMethod', but does not have the attribute 'b'.