Appendix A: Working With Strings

Note: The notation [start, [end]] means start and end are optional. If only one
number is provided, it is taken to be start.

# marks the start of acomment

marks the start and end of a multiline comment
The actual code is in monotype font.
=> marks the start of the output

count (sub, [start, [end]])

Returns the number of times the substring sub appears in the string.

This function is case-sensitive.
[Example]
# In the examples below, 's' occurs at index 3, 6 and 10

# count the entire string

‘This is a string'.count('s')
=>3

# count from index 4 to end of string
‘This is a string'.count('s', 4)
=>2

# count from index 4 to 10-1

‘This is a string'.count('s', 4, 10)

=>1

# count 'T'. There's only 1 'T' as the function is case sensitive.
‘This is a string'.count('T')

=>1

endswith (suffix, [start, [end]])

Returns True if the string ends with the specified suffix, otherwise returns
False.
suffix can also be a tuple of suffixes to look for.

This function is case-sensitive.
[Example]

#'man‘' occurs at index 4 to 6

# check the entire string
‘Postman'.endswith(‘man')

=> True

# check from index 3 to end of string
‘Postman'.endswith(‘man', 3)

=> True

# check from index 2 to 6-1
‘Postman'.endswith(‘man', 2, 6)

=> False

# check from index 2 to 7-1
‘Postman'.endswith(‘man', 2, 7)

=> True

# Using a tuple of suffixes (check from index 2 to 6-1)

‘Postman'.endswith((‘man’, 'ma’), 2, 6)
=> True

find/index (sub, [start, [end]])

Returns the index in the string where the first occurrence of the substring
sub is found.

find( returns -1 if sub is not found.

index() returns ValueError if sub is not found.

This function is case-sensitive.
[Example]

# check the entire string

‘This is a string'.find('s')

=>3

# check from index 4 to end of string
‘This is a string'.find('s', 4)

=>6

# check from index 7 to 11-1
‘This is a string'.find('s', 7,11 )
=>10

# sub is not found
‘This is a string'.find(‘p')

=>-1

‘This is a string'.index(‘p')
=> ValueError

isalnum()

Returns True if all characters in the string are alphanumeric and there is at
least one character, False otherwise.

Alphanumeric does not include whitespaces.

[Example]

‘abcd1234'.isalnum()
=> True

‘abcd123 4\isalnum()
=> False

‘abcd'.isalnum()
=> True

'1234'isalnum()

=> True

isalpha()

Returns True if all characters in the string are alphabetic and there is at least

one character, False otherwise.

[Example]

‘abcd'.isalpha()
=> True

‘abed1234'.isalpha()
=> False
1234‘ isalpha()
=> False

‘ab c'.isalpha()
=> False

isdigit(

Returns True if all characters in the string are digits and there is at least one

character, False otherwise.

[Example]

'1234\isdigit()
=> True

‘abed1234' isdigit()
=> False

‘abcd’ .isdigit()
=> False
‘123 4\isdigit()
=> False

islower()

Returns True if all cased characters in the string are lowercase and there is at

least one cased character, False otherwise.

[Example]

‘abcd'.islower()

=> True

‘Abcd'.islower()
=> False

'‘ABCD'.islower()
=> False

isspace()
Returns True if there are only whitespace characters in the string and there is

at least one character, False otherwise.

[Example]

‘“isspace()

=> True

‘ab'.isspace()

=> False

itle()

Returns True if the string is a titlecased string and there is at least one

character

[Example]

‘This Is A String'.istitle()
=> True
‘This is a string'.istitle()
=> False

isupper()

Returns True if all cased characters in the string are uppercase and there is at

least one cased character, False otherwise.

[Example]

‘ABCD .isupper()
=> True

‘Abcd'.isupper()
=> False

‘abed'.isupper()
=> False

join
Returns a string in which the argument provided is joined by a separator.

[Example]

sep ='-'

myTuple = (‘a', b’, 'c')
myList = ['d', 'e', 'f']
myString = “Hello World"

sep.join(myTuple)
=> 'a-b-c!

sep.join(myList)
=> ‘d-e-f!

sep.join(myString)
=> 'H-e-1-l-o- -W-o-r-l-d"

lower

Returns a copy of the string converted to lowercase.
[Example]

‘Hello Python'.lower()
=> ‘hello python'

replace(old, newJ, count])

Returns a copy of the string with all occurrences of substring old replaced by
new.
count is optional. If given, only the first count occurrences are replaced.

This function is case-sensitive.

[Example]

# Replace all occurrences
‘This is a string'.replace('s’, ‘p')
=> 'Thip ip a ptring'

# Replace first 2 occurrences
‘This is a string'.replace('s', ‘p', 2)
=> 'Thip ipa string'
split([sep Lmaxsplit]])

Returns a list of the words in the string, using sep as the delimiter string.
sep and maxsplit are optional.

If sep is not given, whitespace is used as the delimiter.

If maxsplit is given, at most maxsplit splits are done.

This function is case-sensitive.

[Example]

# Split using whitespace as delimiter
‘This is a string'.split()
=> ['This’, ‘is’, ‘a’, ‘string']

# Split using comma followed by a whitespace as the delimiter
‘This, is, a, string'.split(', ')
=> ['This’, ‘is’, ‘a’, ‘string']

# Split using comma followed by a whitespace as the delimiter
# Only do 2 splits

‘This, is, a, string'.split(', ', 2)

=> ['This’, ‘is’, ‘a, string']
splitlines ([keepends])

Returns a list of the lines in the string, breaking at line boundaries.
Line breaks are not included in the resulting list unless keepends is given and

True.

[Example]

# Split lines separated by \n
‘This is the first line.\nThis is the second line'.splitlines()
=> ['This is the first line.', ‘This is the second line.']

# Split multi line string (e.g. string that uses the ' mark)
“This is the first line.

This is the second line."".splitlines()

=> ['This is the first line.', ‘This is the second line.']

# Split and keep line breaks
‘This is the first line.\nThis is the second line.'.splitlines(True)
=> ['This is the first line.\n’, ‘This is the second line.']

“This is the first line.
This is the second line." .splitlines(True)
=> ['This is the first line.\n', 'This is the second line.']

startswith (prefix[, start[, end]])

Returns True if string starts with the prefix, otherwise returns False.
prefix can also be a tuple of prefixes to look for.

This function is case-sensitive.

[Example]

# 'Post' occurs at index 0 to 3

# check the entire string
‘Postman'.startswith(‘Post')

=> True
# check from index 3 to end of string
‘Postman'.startswith(‘Post', 3)

=> False

# check from index 2 to 6-1
‘Postman'.startswith('Post', 2, 6)
=> False

# check from index 2 to 6-1
‘Postman'.startswith(‘stm'’, 2, 6)
=> True

# Using a tuple of prefixes (check from index 3 to end of string)
‘Postman'.startswith((‘Post’, ‘tma’), 3)
=> True

strip ([chars])

Returns a copy of the string with the leading and trailing characters char
removed.
If char is not provided, whitespaces will be removed.

This function is case-sensitive.

[Example]

# Strip whitespaces
' This is astring ‘.strip()
=> 'This is a string’

# Strip 's'. Nothing is removed since's' is not at the start or end of the string
‘This is a string'.strip('s')

=> 'This is a string'

# Strip 'g'.
‘This is a string'.strip(‘g')

=> ‘This isa strin'
Returns a copy of the string converted to uppercase.

[Example]

‘Hello Python'.upper()
=> ‘HELLO PYTHON'
