# Preface
This book is written to help you learn Python programming FAST and learn it WELL. If you are an absolute beginner in Programming, you'll find that this book explains complex concepts in an easy to understand manner. If you are an experienced coder, this book gives you a good base from which to explore Python.

Topics are carefully selected to give you a broad exposure to Python, while not overwhelming you with information overload. These topics include control structures, error handling techniques, file handling techniques and more. New chapters on object-oriented programming are also included in this edition.

Examples are carefully chosen to demonstrate each concept so that you can gain a deeper understand of the language. The appendices a t the end of the book will also provide you with a convenient reference for some of the commonly used function in Python.

In addition, as Richard Branson puts it: "The best way of learning about anything is by doing". At the end of the course, you'll be guided through a project that gives you a chance to put what you've learned to use.

# Table of Contents
- **Chapter 1: Python, what Python?**
  - 1.1 What is Python?
  - 1.2 Why Learn Python
- **Chapter 2: Getting ready for Python**
  - 2.1 Installing the Interpreter
  - 2.2 Using the Python Shell, IDLE and Writing our FIRST program
- **Chapter 3: The World of Variables and Operators**
  - 3.1 What are variables?
  - 3.2 Naming a Variable
  - 3.3 The Assignment Operator
  - 3.4 Basic Operators
  - 3.5 More Assignment Operators
- **Chapter 4: Data Types in Python**
  - 4.1 Integers
  - 4.2 Float
  - 4.3 String
  - 4.4 Type Casting In Python
  - 4.5 List
  - 4.6 Tuple
  - 4.7 Dictionary
- **Chapter 5: Making Your Program Interactive**
  - 5.1 input()
  - 5.2 print()
  - 5.3 Triple Quotes
  - 5.4 Escape Characters
- **Chapter 6: Making Choices and Decisions**
  - 6.1 Condition Statements
  - 6.2 If Statement
  - 6.3 Inline If
  - 6.4 For Loop
  - 6.5 While Loop
  - 6.6 Break
  - 6.7 Continue
  - 6.8 Try, Except
- **Chapter 7: Functions and Modules**
  - 7.1 What are Functions?
  - 7.2 Defining Your Own Functions
  - 7.3 Variable Scope
  - 7.4 Default Parameter Values
  - 7.5 Variable Length Argument List
  - 7.6 Importing Modules
  - 7.7 Creating our Own Module
- **Chapter 8: Working with Files**
  - 8.1 Opening and Reading Text Files
  - 8.2 Using a For Loop to Read Text Files
  - 8.3 Writing to a Text File
  - 8.4 Opening and Reading Text Files by Buffer Size
  - 8.5 Opening, Reading and Writing Binary Files
  - 8.6 Deleting and Renaming Files
- **Chapter 9: Object Oriented Programming Part 1**
  - 9.1 What is Object-Oriented Programming?
  - 9.2 Writing our own class
  - 9.3 Instantiating an Object
  - 9.4 Properties
  - 9.5 Name Mangling
  - 9.6 What is self
  - 9.7 Class and Static Methods
  - 9.8 Importing a class
- **Chapter 10: Object Oriented Programming Part 2**
  - 10.1 Inheritance
  - 10.2 Writing the Child Class
  - 10.3 Instantiating a Child Object
  - 10.4 Python Special Methods
  - 10.5 Python Built-in Functions for Objects
- **Project: Math and Binary**
  - Part 1: gametasks.py
  - Part 2: gamecalsses.py
  - Part 3: project.py
- **Thank You**
- **Appendix A: Working With Strings**
- **Appendix B: Working With Lists**
- **Appendix C: Working with Tuples**
- **Appendix D: Working With Dictionaries**
- **Appendix E: Project Answers**
- **One Last Thing...**