# Chapter 5: Making Your Program Interactive

Now that we've covered the basics of variables, let us write a program that makes use of them. We'll revisit the "Hello World" program we wrote in Chapter 2, but this time we'll make it interactive. Instead of just saying hello to the world, we want the world to know our names and ages too. In order to do that, our program needs to be able to prompt us for information and display them on the screen.

Two built-in functions can do that for us: `input()` and `print()`.

For now, let's type the following program in IDLE. Save it and run it.

```
myName = input("Please enter your name:")
myAge = input("What about your age:")

print("Hello World, my name is", myName, "and I am", myAge, "years old.")
```

The program should prompt you for your name.

```
Please enter your name:
```

Suppose you entered James. Now press Enter and it'll prompt you for your age.

```
What about your age:
```

Say you keyed in 20. Now press Enter again. You should get the following statement:

```
Hello World, my name is James and I am 20 years old.
```

## 5.1 input()

In the example above, we used the `input()` function twice to ge our user's name and age.

```
myName = input("Please enter your name:")
```

The string "Please enter your name:" is the prompt that will be displayed on the screen to give instructions to the user. Here, we used a simple string as the prompt. If you prefer, you can use the % formatter or the format method discussed in Chapter 4 to format the input string. We'll look at two examples later.

After the prompt is displayed on the screen, the function waits for the user to enter the relevant information. This information is then stored as a string in the variable `myName`. The next input statement prompts the user for his age and stores the information as a string in the variable `myAge`.

That's how the `input()` function works. Pretty straightforward right?

As mentioned above, in addition to using a simple string as the prompt, we can also use the `%` formatter or the `format()` method to display the prompt. For instance, we can change the second input statement above from

```
myAge = input("What about your age:")
```

to

```
myAge = input("Hi %s, what about your age:"%(myName))
```

or

```
myAge = input("Hi {}, what about your age:".format(myName))
```

We'll get

```
Hi James, what about your age:
```

as the prompt instead.

Not that the `input()` function differs slightly in Python 2 and Python 3. In Python 2, if you want to accept user input as a string, you have to use the `raw_input()` function. The `raw_input()` function works similar to the `input()` function in Python 3.

## 5.2 print()

Now, let's move on to the `print()` function. The `print()` function is used to display information to users. It accepts zero or more expressions as arguments, separated by commas.

In the statement below, we passed 5 arguments to the `print()` function. Can you identify them?

```
print("Hello World, my name is", myName, "and I am", myAge, "years old.")
```

The first is the string "Hello World, my name is"

The next is the variable `myName` declared using the `input()` function earlier.

Next is the string "and I am", followed by the variable `myAge` and finally the string "years old.".

Note that we do not use quotation marks when referring to the variables `myName` and `myAge`. If you use quotation marks, you'll get the output

```
Hello World, my name is myName and I am myAge years old.
```

instead, which is obviously not what we want.

Another way to print a statement with variables is to use the `%` formatter we learned in Chapter 4. To achieve the same output as the first print statement above, we can write

```
print("Hello World, my name is %s and I am %s years old."%(myName, myAge))
```

Finally, to print the same statement using the `format()` method, we write

```
print("Hello World, my name is {} and I am {} years old".format(myName, myAge))
```

The `print()` function is another function that differs in Python 2 and Python 3. In Python 2, you'll write it without brackets, like this:

```
print "Hello World, my name is" + myName + "and I am" + myAge + "years old."
```

### Triple Quotes

In some cases, we may want to display a long message using the `print()` function. To do that, we can use the triple-quote symbol `'''` or `"""` to span our message over multiple lines. For instance,

```
print('''Hello World.
My name is James and
I am 20 years old.''')
```

will give us

```
Hello World.
My name is James and
I am 20 years old.
```

This helps to increase the readability of your message.

## 5.4 Escape Characters

Sometimes we may also need to print some special "unprintable" characters such as a tab or a new line. In this case, we need to use the `\`(backslash) character to escape characters that otherwise have a different meaning.

For instance to print a tab, we type the backslash character before the letter `t`, like this `\t`. Without the `\` character, the letter `t` will be printed. With it, a tab is printed. Hence, if you type `print('Hello\tWorld')`, you'll get `Hello     World`

Other common uses of the backslash character are shown below:
`>>>` shows the command and the following lines show the output.

### `\n` (Prints a new line)

```
>>> print('Hello\nWorld')
Hello
World
```

### `\\` (Prints the backslash character itself)

```
>>> print('\\')
\
```

### `\"` (Prints double quote, so that the double quote does not signal the end of the string)

```
>>> print("I am 5'9\" tall")
I am 5'9" tall
```

### `\'` (Print single quote, so that the single quote does not signal the end of the string)

```
>>> print('I am 5\'9" tall')
I am 5'9" tall
```

If you do not want characters preceded by the `\` character to be interpreted as special characters, you can use raw strings by adding an r before the first quote. For instance, if you do not want `\t` to be interpreted as a tab, you should type `print(r'Hello\tWorld')`. You will get `Hello\tWorld` as the output.