# Chapter 6: Making Choices and Decisions

Congratulations, you've made it to the most interesting chapter. I hope you've enjoyed the course so far. In this chapter, we'll look at how to make your program smarter, capable of making choices and decisions. Specifically, we'll be looking at the `if` statement, `for` loop and `while` loop. These are known as control flow tools; they control the flow of the program. In addition, we'll also look at the `try`, `except` statement that determines what the program should do when an error occurs.

However, before we go into these control flow tools, we have to first look at condition statements.

## 6.1 Condition Statements

All control flow tools involve evaluating a condition statement. The program will proceed differently depending on whether the condition is met.

The most common condition statement is the comparison statement. If we want to compare whether two variables are the same, we use the `==` operator (double `=`). For instance, if you write `x == y`, you are asking the program to check if the value of `x` is equal to the value of `y`. If they are equal, the condition is met and the statement will evaluate to `True`. Else, the statement will evaluate to `False`.

Other comparison operators include `!=` (not equal). `<` (smaller than), `>` (greater than), `<=` (smaller than or equal to) and `>=` (greater than or equal to). The list below shows how these signs can be used and gives examples of statements that will evaluate to `True`.

Not equal: `5 != 2`

Greater than: `5 > 2`

Smaller than: `2 < 5`

Greater than or equal to: `5 > 2`, `5 >= 5`

Smaller than or equal to: `2 <= 5`, `2<= 2`

We also have three logical operators, `and`, `or`, `not` that are useful if we want to combine multiple conditions.

The `and` operator returns `True` if all conditions are met. Else it will return `False`. For instance, the statement `5 == 5 and 2 > 1`  will return `True` since both conditions are `True`.

The `or` operator returns `True` if at least one condition is met. Else it will return `False`. The statement `5 > 2 or 7 > 10 or 3 == 2` will return `True` since the first condition `5 > 2` is `True`.

The `not` operator returns `True` if the condition after the `not` keyword is false. Else it will return `False`. The statement `not 2 > 5` will return `True` since 2 is not greater than 5.

## 6.2 If Statement

The `if` statement is one of the most commonly used control flow statements. It allows the program to evaluate if a certain condition is met, and to perform the appropriate action based on the result of the evaluation. The structure of an `if` statement is as follows:

```
if condition 1 is met:
    do A
elif condition 2 is met:
    do B
elif condition 3 is met:
    do C
elif condition 4 is met:
    do D
else:
    do E
```

`elif` stands for "else if" and you can have as many `elif` statements as you like.

If you've coded in other languages like C or Java before, you may be surprised to notice that no parentheses `()` are needed in Python after the `if`, `elif` and `else` keywords. In addition, Python does not use braces `{}` to define the start and end of the `if` statement. Rather, Python uses indentation. Anything indented is treated as a block of code that will be executed if the condition evaluates to `True`.

To fully understand how the `if` statement works, fire up IDLE and key in the following code.

```
userInput = input('Enter 1 or 2:')

if userInput == "1":
    print("Hello World")
    print("How are you?")
elif userInput == "2":
    print("Python Rocks!)
    print("I love Python")
else:
    print("You did not enter a valid number")
```

The program first prompts the user for an input using the `input()` function. The result is stored in the `userInput` variable as a string.

Next the statement `if userInput == "1":` compares the `userInput` variable with the string "1". If the value stored in `userInput` is "1", the program will execute all statements that are indented until the indentation ends. In this example, it'll print "Hello World", followed by "How are you?".

Alternatively, if the value stored in `userInput` "2", the program will print "Python Rocks", followed by "I love Python".

For all other values, the program will print "You did not enter a valid number".

Run the program three times, enter 1, 2 and 3 respectively for each run. You'll get the following output:

```
Enter 1 or 2: 1
Hello World
How are you?

Enter 1 or 2: 2
Python Rocks!
I love Python

Enter 1 or 2: 3
You did not enter a valid number
```

## 6.3 Inline If

An inline if statement is a simple form of an if statement and is more convenient if you only need to perform a simple task. The syntax is:

```
do Task A if condition is True else do Task B
```

For instance,

```
num1 = 12 if userInput == "1" else 13
```

This statement assigns `12` to `num1` (Task A) if `userInput` equals to "1". Else it assigns `13` to `num1` (Task B).

Another example is

```
print("This is task A" if userInput == "1" else "This is task B")
```

This statement prints "This is task A" (Task A) if `userInput` equals "1". Else it prints "This is task B" (Task B).

## 6.4 For Loop

Next, let us look at the `for` loop. The `for` loop executes a block of code repeatedly until the condition in the `for` statement is no longer valid.

### Looping through an iterable

In Python, an iterable refers to anything that can be looped over, such as a string, list, tuple or dictionary. The syntax for looping an iterable is as follows:

```
for a in iterable:
    print(a)
```

Example:

```
pets = ['cats', 'dogs', 'rabbits', 'hamsters']

for myPets in pets:
    print(myPets)
```

In the program above, we first declared the list `pets` and give it the members 'cats', 'dogs', 'rabbits', 'hamsters'. Next the statement `for myPets in pets:` loops through the pets list and assigns each member in the list to the variable `myPets`.

The first time the program runs through the `for` loop, it assigns 'cats' to the variable `myPets`. The statement `print(myPets)` then prints the value 'cats'. The second time the program loops through the `for` statement, it assigns the value 'dogs' to `myPets` and prints the value 'dogs'. The program continues looping through the list until the end of the list is reached.

If you run the program, you'll get

```
cats
dogs
rabbits
hamsters
```

We can also display the index of the members in the list. To do that, we use the `enumerate()` function.

```
for index, myPets in enumerate(pets):
    print(index, myPets)
```

This will give us the output

```
0 cats
1 dogs
2 rabbits
3 hamsters
```

To loop through a dictionary, we use the for loop the same way.

Example:

```
age = {'Peter': 5, 'John': 7}

for i in age:
    print(i)
```

You'll get

```
Peter
John
```

as the output.

If we want to get both the dictionary key and the data, we can do it this way:

Example:

```
age = {'Peter': 5, 'John': 7}

for i in age:
    print("Name = %s, Age = %d", %(i, age[i]))
```

The first time the program run through the `for` loop, it assigns 'Peter' to the variable `i`.

`age[i]` thus becomes `age['Peter']` which is equal to `5`.

When you run the program, you'll get

```
Name = Peter, Age = 5
Name = John, Age = 7
```

Alternatively, you can also use the `items()` method. This is a built-in method that returns each of the dictionary's key-data pair as a (key, data) tuple. Let's look at an example.

Example:

```
age = {'Peter': 5, 'John': 7}

for i,j in age.items():
    print("Name = %s, Age = %d"%(i,j))
```

You'll get 

```
Name = Peter, Age = 5
Name = John, Age = 7
```

The next example shows how to loop through a string.

```
message = 'Hello'

for i in message:
    print(i)
```

The output is

```
H
e
l
l
o
```

### Looping through a sequence of numbers

To loop through a sequence of numbers, the built-in `range()` function comes in handy. The `range()` function generates a list of numbers and has the syntax `range(start, end, step)`.

It start is not given, the numbers generated will start from zero.

Note: A useful tip to remember here is that in Python (and most programming languages), unless otherwise stated, we always start from zero.

For instance, the index of a list and a tuple start from zero.

When using the `format()` method for strings, the positions of arguments start from zero.

When using the `range()` function, if start is not given, the numbers generated start from zero.

If step is not given, a list of consecutive numbers will be generated (i.e step = 1). The end value must be provided. However, one weird ting about the `range()` function is that the given end value is never part of the generated list.

For instance

`range(5)` will generate the list `[0,1,2,3,4]`
`range(3, 10)` will generate `[3,4,5,6,7,8,9]`
`range(4,10,2)` will generate `[4,6,8]`

To see how the `range()` function works in a `for` statement, try running the following code:

```
for i in range(5):
    print(i)
```

You should get

```
0
1
2
3
4
```

## 6.5 While Loop

The next control flow statement we are going to look at is the `while` loop. Like the name suggests, a `while` loop repeatedly executes instructions inside the loop while a certain condition remains valid. The structure of a `while` statement is as follows:

```
while condition is true:
    do A
```

Most of the time when using a while loop, we need to first declare a variable to function as a loop counter. Let's just call this variable `counter`. The condition in the `while` statement will evaluate the value of `counter` to determine if it is smaller (or greater) than a certain value. If it is, the loop will be executed. Let's look at a sample program.

```
counter = 5

while counter > 0:
    print("Counter =",counter)
    counter = counter - 1
```

If you run the program, you'll get the following output

```
Counter = 5
Counter = 4
Counter = 3
Counter = 2
Counter = 1
```

At first look, a while statement seems to have the simplest syntax and should be the easiest to use. However, one has to be careful when using while loops due to the danger of infinite loops. Notice that in the program above, we have the line `counter = counter - 1`. This line is crucial. It decreases the value of `counter` by 1 and assigns this new value back to `counter`, overwriting the original value.

We need to decrease the value of `counter` by 1 so that the loop condition `while counter > 0` wil eventually evaluate to `False`. If we forget to do that, the loop will keep running endlessly resulting in an infinite loop. If you want to experience this first hand, just delete the line `counter = counter - 1` and try running the program again. The program will keep printing `counter = ` until you somehow kill the program. Not a pleasant experience especially if you have a large program and you have no idea which code segment is causing the infinite loop.

## 6.6 Break

When working with loops, sometimes you may want to exit the loop when a certain condition is met. To do that, we use the break keyword. Run the following program to see how it works.

```
j = 0
for i in range(5):
    j = j + 2
    print('i = ', i, ',j =', j)
    if j == 6:
        break
```

You should ge the following output.

```
i = 0, j = 2
i = 1, j = 4
i = 2, j = 6
```

Without the break keyword, the program should loop from `i = 0` to `i = 4` because we used the function `range(5)`. However with the break keyword, the program ends prematurely at `i=2`. This is because when `i = 2`, j reaches the value `6` and the `break` keyword causes the loop to end.

In the example above, notice that we used an `if` statement within a `for` loop. It is very common for us to mix-and-match various control tools in programming, such as using a `while` loop inside an if statement or using a `for` loop inside a `while` loop. This is known as a nested control statement.

## 6.7 Continue

Another useful keyword for loops is the `continue` keyword. When we use `continue`, the rest of the loop after the keyword is skipped for that iteration. An example will make it clearer.

```
j = 0
for i in range(5):
    j = j + 2
    print('\ni = ', i, ', j = ', j)
    if j == 6:
        continue
    print('I will be skipped over if j = 6')
```

You will get the following output:

```
i = 0, j = 2
I will be skipped over if j = 6

i = 1, j = 4
I will be skipped over if j = 6

i = 2, j = 6

i = 4, j = 10
I will be skipped over if j = 6
```

When `j = 6`, the line after the `continue` keyword is not printed. Other than that, everything runs as per normal.

## 6.8 Try, Except

The final control statement we'll look at is the `try`, `except` statement. This statement controls how the program proceeds when an error occurs. The syntax is as follows:

```
try:
    do something
except:
    do something else when an error occurs
```

For instance, try running the program below

```
try:
    answer = 12/0
    print(answer)
except:
    print("An error occurred")
```

When you run the program, you'll get the message "An error occurred". This is because when the program tries to execute the statement `answer = 12/0` in the `try` block, an error occurs since you cannot divide a number by zero. The remaining of the `try` block is ignored and the statement in the `except` block is executed instead.

If you want to display more specific error messages to your users depending on the error, you can specify the error type after the `except` keyword. Try running the program below.

```
try:
    userInput1 = int(input("Please enter a number:"))
    userInput2 = int(input("Please enter another number:"))
    answer = userInput1/userInput2
    print("The answer is", answer)
    myFile = open("missing.txt", 'r')
except ValueError:
    print("Error: You did not enter a number")
except ZeroDivisionError:
    print("Error: Cannot divide by zero")
except Exception as e:
    print("Unknown error:", e)
```

The list below shows the various outputs for different user inputs `>>>` denotes the user input and `=>` denotes the output.

```
>>> Please enter a number: m
=> Error: You did not enter a number
```

Reason: User entered a string which cannot be cast into an integer. This is a `ValueError`. Hence, the statement in the `except ValueError` block is displayed.

```
>>> Please enter a number: 12
>>> Please enter another number: 0
=> Error: Cannot divide by zero
```

Reason: `userInput2 = 0`. Since we cannot divide a number by zero, this is a `ZeroDivisionError`. The statement in the `except ZeroDivisionError` block is displayed.

```
>>> Please enter a number: 12
>>> Please enter another number: 3
=> Than answer is 4.0
=> Unknown error: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'missing.txt'
```

Reason: User enters acceptable values and the line `print("The answer is", answer)` executes correctly. However, the next line raises an error as `missing.txt` is not found. Since this is not a `ValueError` or a `ZeroDivisionError`, the last `except` block is executed.

`ValueError` and `ZeroDivisionError` are two of the many pre-defined error types in Python. `ValueError` is raised when a built-in operation or function receives an argument that has the right type but an inappropriate value. `ZeroDivisionError` is raised when the program tries to divide by zero.

Other common errors in Python include

`IOError` : Raised when an I/O operation (such as the built-in `open()` function) fails for an I/O-related reason, e.g., "file not found".

`ImportError` : Raised when an import statement fails to find the module definition

`IndexError` : Raised when a sequence (e.g. string, list, tuple) is out of range.

`KeyError` : Raised when a dictionary key is not found.

`NameError` : Raised when a local or global name is not found.

`TypeError` : Raised when an operation or function is applied to an object of inappropriate type.

For a complete list of all the error types in Python you can refer to  <a href="https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html" target="_blank">https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html</a>

Python also comes with pre-defined error messages for each of the different types of errors. If you want to display the message, you use the as keyword after the error type. For instance, to display the default `ValueError` message, you write:

```
except ValueError as e:
    print(e)
```

`e` is the variable name assigned to the error. You can give it some other names, but it is common practice to use `e`. The last `except` statement in our program

```
except Exception as e:
    print("Unknown error:", e)
```

is an example of using the pre-defined error message. It serves as a final attempt to catch any unanticipated errors.